In this video we're going to have a look at value now Val you is going to enable us to use greyscale
So not only will we now have black and white but we will also have the shades of grey in between.
And this gives us much more freedom than we had with just the black and white when using outlines it
can improve image by giving an a sense of depth.
We can have implied shadow even highlights as well.
And this starts to give some shape and feel to the images that we're creating.
So let's dive in now and take a closer look at value.
Okay so we will start off here by having a little look at the Wikipedia article on Hugh saturation and
value.
Now this is quite an in-depth article and quite long I have linked it in the resources and in the video
description.
So please do check that out if you would like to learn more.
But suffice to say value refers to how bright something is or how dark Something is with a value of
1 or 100 percent being bright i.e. white.
And if we tone that back down all the way back to black of course when there's no light coming off our
object.
So let's go ahead and play with that now by opening up gimp and finding out how we can adjust the value.
So now that GIMP is open how do we go about doing this.
Well there are a couple of ways of altering the value itself.
We can do it.
First of all from these little colour swatches the foreground and background colour if we go ahead and
click on either one of those I'm going to pick the foreground colour we can see the options that come
up.
Give us a huge saturation and value slider all that we can use to control the value as we see as we
bring that up to 100 percent.
It goes bright white and it goes through all the way back down to black when it's zero.
Now I prefer having something to hand straight away.
So in these tool options I'm going to add another tab and that tab is going to be the colours tab.
So this is brilliant We're starting to customize our interface immediately.
I quite like this particular view of the tab.
However there are others you can pick from as well.
If we go along here we can see different versions the palette versions quite nice because you've got
10 percent changes in gradient so it's nice and easy to read pick a colour and we'll use the colour
picker in a moment as well.
And we've got the sliders that we saw a moment ago as well.
So let's go ahead now and create ourselves a new image.
It's going to be eight by eight like the last lot have been.
And of course we're going to zoom into that image.
Now let's switch to the pencil tooled tool options and turn the size of our brush down to one.
So we've got pixel level control.
I don't use the excuse to switch the background colour and then back again.
Excellent everything's working here.
Now before we rush in and do something else let's say you've gone in and you've put in some shades of
grey here there and everywhere and you want to pick a shade that you've already used before and you
haven't been forward thinking enough to pick a 10 percent gradient so you can't just use it again.
Well what can we do here.
Well we can use what's called the colour pickup and that is a one that looks like a little pet.
You can see the option there is.
Oh and this is incredibly useful once you've laid down a particular shade and you want to reuse it.
If we use the colour picker we can pick any of the ones that we've currently got on screen.
And if you pay attention to the little colour swatch indicating the foreground colour why go ahead and
select.
We can see it's changed or this one and it's changed or this one this change or this one.
And it has changed.
So it's a very quick way of picking up colours or in his case shades that you've already laid down on
the screen.
Now if you completely mark up and this is non-standard anymore you perhaps you've managed to get it
to green and pink or something along those lines and you don't want that.
You can very quickly resets the foreground and back colour to black and white by clicking the little
icon like I did just then.
That's to the lower left of this foreground and background selector.
Or if you want to you can simply hover your mouse over and press the key.
That will also default back to black and white which is incredibly useful when you need to dive in and
change that and perhaps add a splodge of black to our scenes or just press anywhere to colour in the
top.
Black.
Now one of the things that you will notice when it comes to using shades now is it gives you more space
to play with it not only gives you more variety so you can start introducing shadow and light areas
dark areas and highlights as the other important thinkers you can suddenly put a layer of white down
to really accent a certain part of your model.
So if we do less of our picture and we've got a highlight there in the middle and if we think back to
the original face that we had by using greyscale by starting to use shade completely we actually give
ourselves more space.
So if you think about the first head for tiny duru that looks something along these lines you cannot
really use.
Let's go in.
Or both of them are black.
That's not useful.
Hover over D key.
There we go.
So this was the head before and where the eyes went it pretty restricted.
You know they had to go here basically.
And maybe the mouth here.
Now when it comes to using shade we can negate the fact that it's got a border.
The border becomes part of our particular.
I'm going to highlight around the edge here perhaps a bit of.
Shading around here.
Now we've got more space to put the eyes wherever we want.
In fact there is probably still a good location for them.
And you can see we can get a graduated feel across our models a hero might pick that might go a little
darker.
Go there go a little darker again and go here.
And finally go a little darker and go there and it just adds to the effect it makes it look as if our
image itself has a shape to it has a gradient to it as well.
And that is great.
We can use it for highlights.
We can use it for shadows.
And now of course you guys can use it for a challenge.
Okay so your challenge is going to be to create three to five more eight by eight images.
So try describing man warts dog in a park.
Use only grey scales and no colour.
You can obviously use black and white there at the far ends of the grey scale export your three to five
images as pangea's at 32 by thirty two ready for sharing and share your work so far.
Pause video now and give that a go.
Okay guys welcome back.
Let's see what I came up with when trying to describe man walks dog in a park.
Okay welcome back.
So let's go ahead and see what I've come up with.
And let's go and open our work up.
So I have gone to the wrong place here.
Bear with me a few seconds as I find the right folder.
Here we go.
So one of the things that we've got going on here is a bit of a mess.
Now we've got two projects or two little profit.
We've got two little projects right on top of one another now rather than trying to organize it in here.
I'm going to try and organize it outside of guimpe.
So I just closed down that dialogue for the moment and opened up a folder.
So we have a black and white work that we've been working on.
So black and white.
And I'm going to move the black and white things that we've been working on like but Chequers the bowling
ball the whole what where else was the hearts and the smile just smile which opened up and check yes.
Yes it was a move that into the black and white.
And this expo is all to do with the black and white as well but would pretty much done with it now.
I've used it.
I've exported.
I'm going to get rid of that so there's no confusion now.
The next one is the greyscale.
So I've got my dog grey smile Grey walked free.
And there we go.
So let's move those it's great.
And then I can go through and show you what I've done of course I've got some export stuff here as well.
And I forgot to export that into its own folder.
By the looks of it.
So it is useful to clean up as you go.
You will find that you end up with hundreds of images and it's good if they are filed away logically
So if we go into greyscale I'm just going to close down the two faces I've got open there.
And with gimped still open I can go in here and let's see what's the story man.
So let's go for a grey smile because he's a happy man and goes for a walk with his dog in the park.
So dog walk grey walk free.
So this was a bit of an interesting one for me.
Let's zoom in.
These are all eight by eight.
Of course.
Let's start on the face.
So this isn't probably the best you can get with with the face.
It doesn't really add that much more the mouth is in a different position.
And it's kind of shaded your of course assuming there's a light coming in from a certain side.
But it is it does feel like a larger head than me.
Black and white one now is the dog.
This was an interesting one at eight by eight.
Let's zoom in.
There's not much to work with.
How did you guys get some of this.
I'm looking forward to seeing your dogs.
That's probably as close as I'm going to be able to get.
It reminds me of maybe a terrier or something along those lines.
Let's have a look at takes.
So putting shoes on this is the best.
OK.
Can I come up with for a shoe.
Then we've got walking.
And so this is a chap trying to walk.
Not sure of it's come across.
Well it kind of looks like someone walking.
No arms though no space but arms.
So that was a tricky one to get across and the tree the tree was probably the most fun.
Putting all these different shades of grey in trying to make sure that it looks like it's got leaves
on it and different varieties different shades.
And of course you'll notice that the background itself is a white still.
Now you could of course use a different coloured background or a different shaded background.
And like I've done with the floor down here it makes it look like it's got some depth to the image as
well.
So that's my little story there.
I'm now going to go ahead and post those.
Over on the forum myself I hope you guys have done that as well.
I look forward to seeing them and I will see you guys in their next lecture.